---
layout: post
title:  "How to choose the right software development company"
---
## Follow the white rabbit
If you have decided to upgrade your software or acquire a new software solution, you have made the next step for better prosperity of your business. However, the process is not yet finished. It has, in fact, just started, but there is no need to be scared of changes. It is essential to make small steps, one after another. Begin with defining your needs and choosing the right software house. Before making that decision, you should determine your preferences and do the right amount of research. Please have in mind the requirements you seek in an IT company, your future relations and the software itself. There are a lot of software houses on the market using different management methods and technologies and are either focused on creating long-term relationships or just selling their product. When making the decision, it is essential to specify your requirements and highlight them with different candidates.

Below you can find a list of things you should pay attention to while choosing the right software development company:

 **1. Methodology**
To select an appropriate IT company for your business, you should know which development methodology you want them to use. There are many options, but the most common ones are Agile and Waterfall. Agile is a method of project management that involves dividing tasks into phases and continuously reassessing them after every sprint. On the other hand, Waterfall is about performing basic tasks separately, one after another. You can learn more about these two methodologies in this article. Please choose the most suitable option for your company as it may also define your communication with your IT partner during your relationship. Assertiveness and honesty Choose a partner that is not afraid to say no and can easily define what their field of expertise is. In your relationship, you need to be honest and trust each other. Do not be afraid if your partner is straightforward and sometimes assertive. You may hear from them that they prefer to work in JavaScript rather than in other languages. And this is good. They should be professionals in their field of study and help you make changes, so be willing to let them suggest solutions to you.

 **2. Technology**
Being an expert requires a vast amount of knowledge and experience, which is why it is rarely possible to be a professional in multiple fields. That is why you should pay attention to your future partner’s area of expertise and interest. Small companies are more likely to have their requirements and preferences in the case of technology or way of working, which is why the discussion at the beginning of the project is so important. Pay attention to the technology that your partner will be using. What new opportunities will it give you what will be achievable in the future thanks to it? Don’t miss out on the opportunity to develop both yourself and a more robust software solution.

 **3. Partnership**
Choose the company that will meet your expectations and will not limit your business. Some software development companies offer 360-degree services. Instead of buying an existing software solution, consider acquiring a partner that will develop one for you, and will accompany and help you with any problems during all stages of the software development, implementation process and even afterwards. A strong relationship between companies may last for years and should be beneficial for both sides. Your IT partner could be your advantage to win the competition.

 **4. Understanding your business**
Will the implementation of new software be successful? Will your partner develop what your business needs? Answers to these questions often depend on how well you and your IT partner understand your business and the whole industry. Your development partner should understand your challenges, what features you need and, even more importantly, why you need them. If they know the answers, then they will know what to put pressure on to create the most suitable and powerful solution for your company to face these challenges. By understanding your business, they will also be able to help you focus on priorities and advise you from a technical perspective.

 **5. Communication**
While acquiring a new IT partner be as clear and precise as possible about your expectations towards the whole project and the communication process. Ask many questions, for example, to what degree does the company engage in building the vision of the project? Also check if the IT partner is using any project management tool which it shares with clients such as, Jira or Trello. It can make communication faster and easier. If you decide to outsource your software development abroad, make sure that you will be able to quickly and fluently communicate in English. Take into consideration time zones and the time difference between both places. It might be problematic to talk between countries on opposite sides of the globe. You can read more about how to deal with time zone differences in software development outsourcing here.

 **6. Experience, portfolio and recommendations**
Before choosing your partner in software development, consider and compare all your options. Pay attention to the experience and the portfolio of the IT Company. You want the most experienced partner you can find because with experience comes quality and less time needed to fulfil tasks. By looking at the portfolio, you can see what the field of expertise of a particular company is and what they specialize in. You can also search for recommendations and opinions from their previous partners.

Be sure to thoroughly research your options before selecting a software development company. You could gain more than a software solution. You could potentially be gaining a long-term partner to support you through multiple projects. Look for a company that can become a partner in addition to the executor of your idea. When choosing your future software development partner, pay attention to these seven criteria, and start considering your next steps.
